Social media is changing fast and what
worked just a few years ago doesn't work
anymore. Right now, we're seeing the
biggest shift in social media since the
rise of short form video where users,
not algorithms, are taking control. I'm
Neil Patel, founder of NP Digital, one
of the largest marketing agencies in the
world. In this video, I'll break down
seven social media trends that are
reshaping 2026. Let's get into it. Trend
number one, onplatform conversion will
explode. For [music] years, your social
media goal was simple. drive traffic to
your website. Click the link in the bio,
visit our website, buy there. But that
entire model is being replaced. Every
major platform is becoming a complete
sales ecosystem. [music]
And if you're still trying to drive
traffic off platform, you're already
losing sales. Tik Tok, Instagram,
YouTube, and Facebook are racing to keep
users inside their app from start to
finish. Facebook proved this model works
well with lead forms. Shopify's 2025
update confirmed that native checkout
for Tik Tok and Instagram and brands
using social commerce stores saw
conversions increase between 20 and 40%.
Think about this. Soon everything will
happen in app. You scroll Tik Tok, see a
product, click buy, enter a payment, get
confirmation, all without ever opening a
browser. This fundamentally [music]
changed how you structure your funnels.
Successful businesses in 2026 won't just
be driving traffic to websites. They'll
be optimizing their conversion journey
inside these [music] platforms. And not
just for products, they'll also be doing
it for lead captures and service-based
businesses as well. Just like with
Facebook ads, you can capture a lead on
Facebook without driving them to your
website. It's cheaper than driving
traffic to your website. Why? Because
Facebook has that user still on
platform, meaning they can show them
another ad and potentially get them to
click all over and make more money. So,
if you want to be an early adopter,
here's what you need to do. First,
integrate with platform native commerce
tools. [music] If you're on Shopify,
enable Tik Tok shop and Instagram
shopping now. Connect Stripe to social
checkout systems. [music] Second,
optimize your call to action for
onplatform conversion. Stop saying visit
our website. Say shop now or buy here
with native [music] checkout buttons.
You can also do this for service-based
businesses. You can educate people on
your services throughout the content on
these social platforms like Instagram.
You can create a short form video
talking about what you have to offer.
And within that video, you can have
people comment to get more information
directly messaged to them. And you
[music] can use platforms like Manyhat
for that. Or within your video, you can
just tell people what phone number to
call to get in touch with you. Third,
redesign your social funnels, your ads,
your product pages, and checkout all
needs to work seamlessly inside the
platform itself. Brands that master
onplatform conversion in 2026 will
capture the majority of social commerce
revenue. Don't get left behind. Trend
two, user controlled feeds are taking
over. For years, you could rely on
Instagram's algorithm to push your
content to interested viewers based on
engagement patterns, but that's changing
fast. Viewers [music] aren't just
scrolling past content they don't want
anymore. They can now actively tune
their feeds to exclude entire content
categories. And this feature is going to
become more sophisticated every month.
This means if your content doesn't
consistently deliver value, you could
see significant [music] drops in your
reach. Instagram introduced early
algorithm control tools in January 2025,
confirmed by Adam Moseri. By September,
they rolled out major updates with tune
your algorithm feature that lets users
add or exclude interest topics. Now,
[music] in late 2025, they're beta
testing even more granular configuration
options. You can exclude entire topics.
If your feed is overloaded with, let's
say, politics, but you want food and
travel, you can adjust it manually.
Tired of [music] seeing fitness content?
You can suppress that category
completely. This changes everything for
creators and brands. For years, you
could ride engagement momentum and
algorithmic favor. But when users
actively suppress your [music] content
type through preference tuning, you
can't rely on passive discovery anymore.
You need to take the initiative and give
your target audience exactly what they
want. Here's how to [music] do that.
First, create content people actively
want. You're not competing for
algorithmic favor anymore. You're
competing for intentional attention.
Second, [music] focus on consistent
engagement, not viral hits. If users
engage regularly, they won't suppress
your category. And finally, diversify
your content themes. Don't make your
brand so narrow that users can easily
tune you out with preference settings.
This change is not a bad thing. It
favors those who take time [music] to
define their target audiences and make
content specifically for them. Trend
three, long- form video is making a
comeback. Since 2020, when Tik Tok took
off and other platforms started
prioritizing short form video formats,
going semiviral wasn't that difficult.
if your content was half decent. But
this could only go for so long because
the data is showing that viewers are
exhausted. Long- form content is making
a major comeback. Fast, snackable,
dopamine-driven content isn't cutting it
anymore. Viewers [music] are craving
depth, storytelling, and real substance.
Upskillist September [music] 2025 study
found that long- form videos generate 10
times more [music] views and five times
more meaningful comments than short form
posts. YouTube, which is primarily a
long- form content platform, holds over
50% of total social watch time globally.
And get this, Tik Tok now allows
10-minute [music] uploads. We're also
seeing microeries rise. Brands are
creating serialized narrative-driven
content. For example, there's a short
drama called Roomies, created by a
rental management software company that
markets their products through
storytelling [music]
instead of traditional ads. I think what
we're seeing is that brands are finally
catching on to a misunderstood [music]
position. That short form content is the
only real way to draw attention online.
If that were true, people wouldn't be
watching movies and TV shows. The shift
shows that if you can tell a story
that's relevant and relatable to your
target audience, you won't [music] just
draw their attention. You'll keep it
long after they're done watching your
video. So, if you've been prioritizing
short form [music] content, you can
transition in three steps. First,
experiment with longer formats. If you
only create reals and Tik Toks, test
three to five minute videos with real
storytelling. Second, [music] create
serialized content. Think of your
content like a TV show. Build narratives
that make [music] people return for the
next episode. Third, prioritize
retention over virality. Platforms
[music]
reward watch time, not just views. A
5-minute video with 35% retention
usually beats a 30-se secondond video
with 40% retention. But even with
excellent long- form content, you have
to consider how your target audience
will find [music] you in the first
place. Trend four, social platforms are
becoming search engines. Right now,
search on video platforms is becoming
more important than ever because we have
mass groups of people skipping Google
entirely and going straight to Tik Tok,
Instagram, and YouTube as your primary
search engines. If you're only
prioritizing SEO on Google, you're
heavily limiting your visibility and
leaving a large chunk of your audience
unserved. Here's the data. 64% of Gen Z
use Tik Tok for search and 41% of all US
consumers do the same according to WC
and Adobe's data. Sensible 2025 guide
showed that 40% of Gen Z prefer Tik Tok
or Instagram to Google for product or
how-to queries. When someone wants to
find a new restaurant, they search Tik
Tok for skincare advice, Instagram. To
fix something, [music] YouTube. These
platforms are indexing video titles,
captions, spoken words, and even
comments. [music] Tik Tok now displays
search keywords in creator dashboards,
showing exactly which queries are
driving traffic to your content. Every
social post needs search optimization.
If your captions, titles, and
descriptions aren't keyword optimized,
[music]
you're invisible to millions of people
searching on these platforms every
single day. So, here's how you optimize
for SEO on video platforms. First, treat
[music] every post like SEO. Use
keywords and captions, video titles, and
descriptions just like you would for
Google. Second, research what people are
actually searching for on each platform.
Tik Tok's search insights will show you
trending queries. You can also [music]
use Answer the Public to see what's hot
on Tik Tok, Instagram, and YouTube all
in one place. You create content around
what [music] people are actively looking
for. Third, optimize for
discoverability, not just engagement.
Videos that rank in search drive views
for months, not just days, and sometimes
they even drive views for years.
Optimizing for search will get you more
visibility, but the next point shows
that the sentiment around influencers as
we've known them is changing to
something that favors more business
focused approach to content creation.
Trend five, expert personal brands are
replacing influencers. [music] For
years, influencer marketing meant
partnering with people who have large
audiences regardless of their actual
expertise. That model is slowly dying
out. In 2026, brands don't want
entertainers with big follower accounts.
They want credible experts with real
authority. LinkedIn and Thinkers 360
reports showing surge demand for
expertled personal brands. Corporate
partnerships are increasingly favoring
educators and specialists over
traditional influencers. Brands are
seeking subject matter experts. People
are known for something specific. They
want that top voice in B2B SAS, the
leading sustainable fashion expert or
the go-to financial literacy authority.
Here's the thing. A creator with 50,000
highly engaged followers who known as an
authority in their niche is more
valuable than a generic influencer with
a million followers. So, here's how you
become the go-to expert in your niche
that brands can't wait to collaborate
with. First, if you're a creator, become
known for something specific. Pick a
niche and become the undisputed expert
in that space. Second, if you're a
brand, stop chasing follower counts.
Partner with people who have real
authority in your industry. Third,
explore [music] co-branded products. The
future isn't just endorsements. It's
customized products built in
partnerships with experts. Expert-driven
[music]
personal brands will dominate 2026.
Entertainers without real expertise will
lose relevance fast. Trend number six,
virtual influencers are dying. A few
years ago, virtual influencers seem like
the future. Digital avatars, AI
personalities, faceless brands posting
24/7. But audiences are clearly
rejecting that trend, and we can expect
that rejection to accelerate in 2026.
Synthetic personalities are becoming a
fast way to destroy a brand. It's like
calling customer service and getting
stuck with the automated voice system.
They might give you information, but
you're desperately trying to reach a
real person, right? Virtual influencers
trigger that same frustration. People
crave genuine, authentic human
connection, not synthetic perfection.
And the data backs this sentiment. The
World Federation of Advertisers survey
found that 60% of brands have no plans
for virtual influencers, citing low
authenticity and poor engagement. This
proves that people crave genuine human
connection and no amount of AI generated
content can replace that. So if you want
your brand to create a genuine
connection with your audience, here's
what you need to do. First, stop
investing in virtual influencers. The
ROI [music] isn't there and the
audiences don't trust them. Second,
double down on real authentic creators.
The more human and relatable your
content is, the better it performs.
Third, [music] focus on emotional
connections, not just aesthetics.
Content that makes people feel something
always wins. And finally, here's the
last trend. But before I go into that
trend, if you just want my team at NP
Digital to do all your marketing for
you, whether it's social media,
influencer marketing or even traditional
SEO or GEO, or even paid advertising,
hit us up. We always love to help people
no matter what type of business you are
and no matter what country you're in.
Trend seven, social fatigue and the
quality reset. Up to this point, the
main goal of content has been to keep
viewers engaged as much as possible.
This mostly involved retention-based
tactics that viewers find insulting and
annoying today. Gen Z is pulling back
from social media. Usage is declining.
Why? Because they're exhausted. Viewers
are tired of endless scrolling and
mindless content. And if cheesy
retention strategies are your tactic for
2026, you won't just fail to grow.
You'll lose the audience you already
have. Crow Pink's 2025 report showed
that Jenz's social usage [music] is
flattening after years of consistent
growth. Nearly half are cutting back due
to content fatigue. [music] Think about
junk food versus real natural
nutrientdense food. Junk food tastes
amazing in the moment, but it lacks what
really matters, nutrients. That's
exactly what's happening with content.
Audiences are craving real substance,
not [music] empty calories. This is
fundamental. For years, the game was
volume. Post as much as possible and
hope something sticks. But now, quality
beats quantity. One meaningful piece of
content outperforms 10 shallow posts
every time. And here's how you inject
meaning into everything you create.
First, audit your content for substance.
Ask [music] yourself, does this teach,
inspire, or mean something to my
audience? If the answer is no, don't
post it. Second, prioritize depth over
frequency. It's better to post two
quality pieces weekly than seven
mediocre posts. Third, focus on
narrative and storytelling. Content that
tells a compelling story always cuts
through [music] the noise. 2026 rewards
brands and creators who deliver meaning,
not just content. The quality reset is
here and is permanent. Social media is
transforming faster than ever. on
platform conversions, user control
feeds, expert-driven influence, and the
quality reset are redefining everything
about how we connect with audiences.
Brands that adapt to these trends will
dominate their markets. The ones that
don't will disappear. But this only
works if you structure your content
strategy correctly.
>> [music]
>> In my next video, I'm sharing the exact
strategies that